TrackedList (#569)
emberjs/rfcs: text/0569-tracked-list.md

- Start Date: 2019-12-23
- Relevant Team(s): Ember.js
- RFC PR: https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/569
- Tracking: (leave this empty)

# TrackedList

## Summary

Introduces a new array-like class whose usage is autotracked by default, and
is designed with performance in mind.

```js
import { TrackedList } from '@glimmer/tracking';

class Person {
  friends = TrackedList.from(['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo']);

  addFriend(newFriend) {
    this.friends.push(newFriend);
  }
}
```

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: I'd add to this that there's another (and IMO even more important than paradigm-preference) reason that this is valuable: performance. Immutable functional updates have many advantages, but without something like [persistent data structures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persistent_data_structure), they can carry  a high performance penalty.

`TrackedList` allows users to make that tradeoff as they like, whatever their programming paradigm preference—and there's no reason that you can't provide a functional abstraction around it if that's your jam.

`@tracked` in Ember Octane was primarily designed around the use case of
tracking changes to _properties_ on classes. However, there are other forms of
state that need to be changed in an Ember app, and the most common one is
tracking changes to _arrays_.

When `@tracked` was introduced, one of the suggested possibilities for tracking
changes to arrays was the _immutable pattern_:

```js
class Person {

>   @friends = ['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo'];

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  @tracked friends = ['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo'];
```

  addFriend(newFriend) {
    this.friends = [...this.friends, newFriend];
  }
}
```

This pattern is solid and works very well for many Octane users, but it is
fairly opinionated toward a functional-immutable style of programming, one that
is different from many Ember apps historically, and that conflicts with
established programming styles in the ecosystem. This is not necessarily a bad
thing - one of autotracking's strengths is that it is unopinionated about
programming style, and can be used with many different paradigms - but it means
that users who prefer an Object Oriented Programming (OOP) style don't have a
modern, ergonomic equivalent.

We received feedback to this effect from a good number of Octane early adopters,
which is why we decided to switch back to using `EmberArray` within the guides
and documentation for our basic examples.

```js
import { A } from '@ember/array';

class Person {

>   @friends = A(['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo']);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  friends = A(['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo']);
```

  addFriend(newFriend) {
    this.friends.pushObject(newFriend);
  }
}
```

`EmberArray` is reactive, so changes to it will update autotracked values and it
has the behaviors most OOP users want. However, it has a lot of its own baggage:

- KVO methods like `pushObject` and `popObject` have to be learned in order to
  use the array, which means learning a whole new array API to be effective in
  Ember.
- Custom extra methods like `mapBy` and `sortBy` add to the confusion, since
  they extend the core array API, and sometimes have conflicting names (e.g.
  `any` vs `some`)
- Prototype extensions can still be used, and it can be confusing to new users
  since their DX is fairly nice, even though they have many downsides and are
  generally recommended against.
- Performance is not great, since they either rely on patching the array
  prototype, which is very bad, or on re-implementing most array methods under
  the hood.

> ### Introducing `TrackedList`

Reviewer: One concern I have with this name is that `List` suggests, well, *lists*, which are a standard abstraction with specific characteristics. At a minimum we will need to document how this `List` type is implemented, so that people will have a sense of the performance characteristics – and specifically, if this is implemented on top of JS arrays rather than as a linked list, we should be explicit about that (presumably adding a note to that effect in the **How We Teach This** section).

The goal of `TrackedList` is to provide a better `EmberArray`, in the short

> term, for Ember users who prefer this style of programming; One that lines up

Reviewer 3: The RFC should probably mention, if only as an aside, what the long term preference is, if not `TrackedList`.

Reviewer 3: Presumably it's `Proxy`, but it's not totally obvious since later on when `Proxy` is discussed a couple of important caveats are emphasized.

Reviewer 4: IMHO, if this is not the long term solution, it should not be added to core and should remain in an addon.

more directly with standard array behaviors, and is also reactive.

```js
import { TrackedList } from '@glimmer/tracking';

class Person {
  friends = TrackedList.from(['Yehuda', 'Melanie', 'Ricardo']);

  addFriend(newFriend) {
    this.friends.push(newFriend);
  }

  get firstFriend() {
    let [first, ...rest] = this.friends;

    return first;
  }
}
```

`TrackedList` will be as close to 1-1 with the native array API as possible.
However, it will not attempt to be a drop-in replacement for native arrays,
since this is not possible without native `Proxy` (which is not supported in
older browsers) and would have major performance caveats even if it were. This
is also the motivation behind the name: `TrackedArray` would imply a tracked
version of native arrays, where `TrackedList` implies that it is its own data

> structure, with potentially divergent behaviors.

Reviewer: A couple questions as I'm considering this:

- What would those "potentially divergent behaviors be"?
- Is it possible to ship a `TrackedArray` *now*, with future performance improvements unlocked when IE11 is removed (whenever Ember 4 ships), and if so, how do the tradeoffs of doing that compare to the tradeoffs of introducing this class now and then potentially *another* class later?

Author: 1. Specifically, the two divergences in this RFC are:
  * The difference in behaviors of `sort` and `reverse`
  * The readonly nature of `length`
2. It is not possible to ship `TrackedArray` without native Proxy, so we would have to wait for IE11 support. The native Proxy version is still much much slower than a native array based solution, by at least an order of magnitude, currently.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarifications!

> ## Detailed design

Reviewer: It'd be great if we included the full API spec in this section!

  }
}
```

From a change tracking perspective, we can see that this is actually very
similar to the immutable pattern described at the beginning of this RFC - we
are essentially telling the tracking system that some changes have occured, and
now `friends` is _effectively_ a new array that needs to be reprocessed.

In general, methods that _access_ the list and don't mutate it will entangle
the list in the autotracking context. Methods that _mutate_ the list will
invalidate, but not entangle the list, preventing backflow issues when
rendering.

### `getAt` and `setAt`

It will not be possible to access the list items directly using `[]` syntax,
like on normal arrays, since this would require native proxies (and would incur
performance penalties). `TrackedList` will have two extra methods instead for
direct index access: `getAt` and `setAt`. These methods will operate similar to
`objectAt` and `replace` on `EmberArray` today, allowing the user to pass a
numeric index as the first value, and in the case of `setAt` to pass the value
to set the index to as the second:

```ts
declare class TrackedList<T> {
  getAt(index: number): T;
  setAt(index: number, value: T): T;
}
```

> ### `sort` and `reverse`

Reviewer: Borrowing an idea from Swift, perhaps we should name these `sorted` and `reversed`, the difference of names implying the difference in outcome?

mutating upstream values.

### `arr` in Array Callbacks

Many array callbacks, such as `map` and `reduce`, receive the array as the third
argument:

```js
[1, 2, 3].map((value, index, arr) => value + 1);
```

For performance reasons, `TrackedList` will not provide the list itself as the
last argument. Instead, it will provide the underlying array, which is used as a
storage mechanism to back the list. In `DEBUG` mode, this array will be wrapped
with a Proxy which will:

1. Alert users if they attempt to use non-standard methods such as `getAt` and
   `setAt`.
2. Throw an error if users try to mutate the array in any way. It should be
   considered read-only for the purposes of usage within callbacks.

This will allow common array-mapping libraries to be used interoperably with
lists, without causing issues by accidentally mutating the internal storage of
the list.

### `Array.isArray`, `isEmberArray`, and Instance Checks

`Array.isArray` and `isEmberArray` will return `false` for instances of
`TrackedList`. Users can check to see if it is an instance using `instanceOf`:

```js
let friends = new TrackedList();

friends instanceOf TrackedList; // true
```

### `length`

> `length` will be an immutable/readonly property on `TrackedList`. This is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`length` will be a readonly property on `TrackedList`. This is to
```

I *think* if I'm understanding the intent here correctly, we should describe this as `readonly`, since it *will* change if users `push` or `pop` from the list.

Also, is `length` auto-tracked? (I'd assume yes, but I'd love if it were explicit here.)

  - `replace` is a not an ideal method for updating a value at a predetermined
    index. It's API is more similar to `splice`, which is confusing and
    difficult to work with.
  Some potential alternatives include:
  - `objectAt` and `replaceAt`
  - `valueAt` and `replaceAt`
  - `valueAt` and `setValueAt`
  `TrackedList` could also implement `objectAt` and `replace` in order to remain
  mostly compatible with legacy code, but recommend that `getAt`/`setAt` be used
  by convention.

- Passing the underlying array as the third argument to methods like `map` and
  `forEach` may be confusing to users. However, passing the list itself instead
  would remove many of the browsers optimizations for these methods. They are
  implemented in most modern runtimes as precompiled, pre-JITed code, and
  matching anything near the level of native performance is likely impossible.
  The other alternative would be to not pass a third argument at all (in
  development mode), which would prevent users from relying on it in the first
  place. This would limit the interoperability of `TrackedList` somewhat, but
  would likely not have a massive impact.

> ## Unresolved questions

Reviewer: Is `TrackedArray` to be subclassed? If so, what invariants do subclasses need to uphold?

Reviewer 3: I had exactly this question.

Also, what is the intended API for a subclass to manually invalidate itself?

Author: `TrackedList` is not intended to be subclassed, though there isn't a way to prevent it in JS, and there is no API for manual invalidation. If users want to implement a custom iterable, the recommendation would instead be to use the standard `Symbol.iterable` API to do so, as it should be fully supported by Ember at this point. If there are still some gaps, they should probably be addressed in a separate RFC.

> - How does this impact the potential functional array-methods RFC (functional

Reviewer: Whoops: incomplete sentence!
